---
layout: post
title: Nassim Taleb's Incerto
subtitle: Thoughts and Considerations
cover-img: /assets/img/path.jpg
thumbnail-img: /assets/img/antifragile.jpg
share-img: /assets/img/path.jpg
tags: [books, test]
---

Why do I still think about Nassim Taleb's work from time to time? I read his books at a time when I was being introduced to Econ, and I kept contrasting what I was being taught with what I was reading in the Incerto. Why don't we talk about Antifragile systems? Why are we not being taught about ergodicity and scaling? I keep thinking about how many of the ”effects” found in Econ studies carelessly confuse the prob(dying) for 1 person playing Russian roulette 100 times with prob(dying) for 100 ppl playing Russian roulette once. For example, studies of effects of corruption in different countries that extrapolate their results to say something about a country going from least corrupt to most corrupt. Differences between countries is not the same as differences in a country over time. Or behavioural Econ studies, like the effect of drawing shadows on crosswalks that slow drivers down because it looks 3D. Sure, that might slow down a driver the first few times they see the ”3D” crosswalk, but after the Nth time, is there any effect at all?

I used to read books that had all the answers. They were Econ ”self-help” and recipe books. What I had a very hard time grasping reading The Black Swan and Fooled by Randomness at first was, when is Taleb going to give us concrete answers on how to solve all the problems he mentions? Of course, there are no one-size fits all answers. That’s where Antifragile comes in. It’s about allowing institutions and cultures to evolve, gaining from disruptions and shocks, to become Antifragile. It’s about experimentation. It’s about constantly learning and surviving. It’s about minimising your loss. If there were clear cut answers, would it even be ethical for Taleb to give them if he has no skin in the game? 

I’m still figuring it out. On a personal level, on a professional level. While the Incerto can be read in any order, I feel like the way I read it benefitted me a lot. The doom and gloom of The Black Swan, Fooled by Randomness, slowly turn to learning how to differentiate between systems in Antifragile and finally the beauty and honor in being accountable for the consequences of the risks one takes in Skin in the Game. 

We teach kids accountability, but we lose a lot of that when we become adults, especially professional or academic adults. 

The Bed of Procrustes: 2018-07-22
Skin in the Game: 2018-05-06
Antifragile: 2017-03-08
Fooled by Randomness: 2016-03-27
The Black Swan: 2016-02-08

A review of Antifragile by [Boyd Donkin in the Independent](https://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/reviews/antifragile-nassim-nicholas-taleb-8343870.html) that hits home: "On many pages I felt the urge to fling this hefty volume... on a non-random path towards his swollen head. Yet time and again I returned to two questions about his core ideas: Is he right, and does it matter? My verdict? Yes, and yes."
