---
layout: post
title: Identity
subtitle: ...Both, neither and an essay question
tags: [personal, reflections]
---

## The Suburb and Downtown
In 1998, my parents moved to Sweden from Egypt. I grew up with two equally beautiful sceneries.
I saw the local outdoor fruit markets in the suburb where we lived, and the fast-paced café-packed
downtown where I went to primary school.

It is a tale of two worlds, and I.

## An Essay Question
At age 16, I read the first ever poem that put in words what I had thought for a long time.
The poem, by Özgür Kibar, was included as a text in the National Test in Swedish, which was followed by an essay question.
The title of this masterpiece is "Både och och varken eller" (eng: Both and neither).

This turned out to be one of the most important essay questions I have ever answered.

## The Poem
In the poem, Kibar is politely asked "Who are you?" and "what is YOUR identity".
As way of answering, he takes us on a journey exploring identity,
belonging and, ultimately, the absurdity of it all.

Among his many qualities, he lists being "a fiery Turk and a stable Swede."
He describes himself as garlic, olives and cabbage dolma, as well as 
Midsummer Eve in the Swedish archipelago (arguably, the pinnacle of Swedish traditions).

Halfway through, he says:
    _"I've asked myself this very question that you pose",_
    _and it has short circuited my poor brain cells,_
    _Because my only conclusion is a contradiction_

And this, in my understanding, is the ultimate point of his poem.
The question that is addressed in the poem is not wrong, ill-willed,
or out of place. It is a question that many people ask themselves,
myself included. "What is MY identity?".
To the extent that there is an answer, it so complex and full of contradictions.
And it has short circuited my poor brain cells.

## Swedish, Egyptian, Suburban, Downtown
I am Egyptian, but only in Sweden.
I am Swedish, but only in Egypt.

I am the kid that grew up in an immigrant-tight area in Stockholm's suburb, but only among my high-class native Swedish friends.
And I am the well-spoken, academically minded, assimilated (or "Swedified") outsider, but only among my immigrant friends.

The more “established”, older immigrants in our community would ask me “Which do you like best, Sweden or Egypt?”.
My answer is usually "Sweden" or whatever I feel pleases the person asking the question.
It is a stupid question. I grew up in Sweden. The answer should be Sweden. Yet,
the more I'm asked the question, the more I doubt my answer.

It's like asking a professional football player which they enjoy more, playing football or basketball.
Is it not obvious to you that the answer is football?

## You too, I guess
I’m sure you have experienced something similar, even if you’re not a Middle-Eastern immigrant in a Scandinavian country.

Perhaps you relate to this post because you are a doctor by profession but side-hustle as an amateur hip-hop music producer. 
Or maybe you're a soft spoken book nerd in a heavy metal band. You're a primary school teacher pursuing her own studies—thus, a teacher and a student.
Your two worlds overlap (or barely so), and you don’t neatly belong to either category. 

## Identity, whatever that is...
We can have multiple identities. And we highlight certain aspects of our identities as we see fitting. 

I cannot fully explain my identity, because I do not know it completely. 

I am not entirely Egyptian or entirely Swedish. I am not only an immigrant. I am a believer that doesn't attend church. I am soft spoken with vulgur humour. I am, and always have been, both and neither.
 
## A better question
What questions should we ask to better get to know someone?

"What is your identity?" isn't a bad question. It's answers could be "Swedish", mixed, or some other identity. There is, however, an alternative question that I find more appealing.

Imagine starting the conversation with "Tell me about the place where you grew up." It allows the person to 
go into as many or as few details as they see fit. An answer could start with "Well, I was born _there_, but I grew up _here_".
An answer could also be "In an apartment on the outskirts of Stockholm". 

This tells you much more about the person than simply their "identity". For one, it tells you how interested the person is in
sharing their personal story (a long and detailed answer may signal openness to continue discussing this subject).
It has the potential to naturally move the conversation forward. Most importantly,
it allows people to discover commonalities and discuss differences in their upbringing beyond their "identity".

## Excellent students of life
I too ask stupid questions—more often than I'd like to admit.
The next time I am interested in knowing about someones identity, I will remind myself that the difference between "What is your identity?" and "Tell me about the place where you grew up" 
is much like the difference between a multiple choice question and an essay question. Lazy students like multiple choice question, and we are better than being lazy in learning about people we care about.

Next time, I will ask the essay question.

<details>
  <summary>Original text in Swedish</summary>
    Båda och och varken eller<br>
    Vem är du, undrade en undrare<br>
    kunde frågan varit sundare<br>
    det var en artighetsfras i all enkelhet<br>
    vilken är DIN identitet<br>
    jag sa att "jag ska svara så gott jag kan<br>
    på frågan du ställer"<br>
    jag är både och och jag är varken eller<br>
    för jag är utländsk och jag är inhemsk<br>
    jag är en eldig turk, jag är en trygg svensk<br>
    jag är vitlök, oliver och kåldolmar<br>
    och jag är midsommarafton på skärgårdsholmar<br>
    Jag har mörkt hår på mitt bröst<br>
    och lite på rygg som brukligt för turkar<br>
    jag sorterar mina sopor och jag pantar mina burkar<br>
    jag firar jul med familj, men också ramadan<br>
    är jag nu det ena eller det andra, det vete fan<br>
    Och jag fortsatte förklara för honom att<br>
    "jag har ställt den själv den här frågan du ställer"<br>
    och den har bränt kortslutning på mina stackars hjärnceller<br>
    för en motsägelse blir min slutsats och den enda som gäller<br>
    jag är både och och jag är varken eller<br>
    jag är inte det ena, inte det andra heller<br>
    jag är ett jetplan med propeller<br>
    en guldmedaljör som står och gnäller<br>
    jag är både och och jag är varken eller<br>
    jag är en proppmätt gäst som sitter och beställer<br>
    tårta på tårta<br>
    jag är en silkeslen vårta i rasismens feta röv<br>
    för än är jag svart, än är jag vit<br>
    än hör jag hit och än hör jag dit<br>
    jag är som vatten och sprit i en Aquavit<br>
    kanske ni tycker jag snackar massa skit<br>
    men jag känner mig som gryningen som skymningen<br>
    jag är båd´ natt och dag<br>
    och bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla<br>
    tack ska ni ha<br>
    - <em>Özgür Kabir</em>
</details>


<details>
  <summary>Very very rough translation to English</summary>
    Both and neither,<br>
    Who are you? asked curiously.<br>
    A reasonable question<br>
    and a courtesy phrase,<br>
    what is YOUR identity?<br>
    I said, "I will answer you<br>
    as well as I can."<br>
    I am both and I am neither.<br>
    I am a foreigner and a native.<br>
    I am a fiery Turk and a stable Swede.<br>
    I am garlic, olives and cabbage dolma.<br>
    I am Midsummer Eve at the archipelago.<br>
    I have black chest hair,<br>
    and some hair on my back—as is common for Turks.<br>
    I recycle my garbage and return empty cans.<br>
    I celebrate Christmas and Ramadan with the family,<br>
    Am I this or that, I couldn't know.<br>
    I explained,<br>
    "I've asked myself this very question that you pose",<br>
    and it has short circuited my poor brain cells,<br>
    Because my only conclusion is a contradiction,<br>
    I am both and I am neither,<br>
    I am not the former nor the latter,<br>
    I am a jet plane with propellers,<br>
    A gold medal winner that's whining,<br>
    I am a full customer ordering more,<br>
    It's superfluous,<br>
    Jag I am a smooth zit on raceism's fat ass,<br>
    Because I am yet to be black, and yet to be white,<br>
    I am yet to belong here, and yet to belong there.<br>
    Jag I like water and spirits in an Aquavit,<br>
    perhaps you think I'm talking shit,<br>
    but I feel like dusk and dawn,<br>
    I am both night and day,<br>
    och bla bla bla bla,<br>
    thank you.<br>
    - <em>Özgür Kabir</em>

</details>
