---
layout: post
title: Music in Public
subtitle: ...Culture, Clamour and Glamour
cover-img: /assets/img/2022-05-19-big-jay-mcneely.jpg
thumbnail-img: /assets/img/2022-05-19-big-jay-mcneely.jpg
tags: [personal, reflections]
---
Are you into Jazz? For me, I am completely unbothered by any subgenre of Jazz at any time of the day, no matter how intense or “noisy” it is. An impromptu jazz duet between a saxophonist and a trombonist on the subway would make me happy regardless of the time of day or how tired I am.

## The scenarios
Has this happened to you before? You’re on the subway on your way home from a long shift at work and just as you are about to settle in, a group of teenagers sit a few meters away from you—blasting music heard that could be heard throughout the train. At that moment, you are mad at them for their complete disregard of social etiquette. Somewhere along the journey, they may even start singing along to this abominable music. You want to tell them off but can’t be bothered get in an altercation. So, you continue your whole journey side-eyeing them—mad, disturbed, tensed—until either you or they reach their destination.

Early June of each year, there is another phenomenon happening in Swedish public transportation. Around this time of the year, Swedish high-school graduates roam around town in the traditional graduation hat, white dresses (for women) and suits (for men). If you, like me, have graduated from high-school in Sweden, this is one of the happiest moments of your life. 

When a group of high schoolers gets on the metro and start singing in a celebratory (and slightly intoxicated) manner, I am not bothered. As far as I can tell, nor is anyone else on the train. Clearly, being loud on the train is acceptable in this scenario.

## The contradiction
You see where I’m going with this. In one instance, we related to a scenario where loud music was not acceptable on the train and another where it was. 

Thus, one set of social rules applies to one instance and another to the other instance. I say this is a contradiction, but it is not a contradiction per se. It would be a contradiction if we had only one set of social rules that should apply to both instances but does not.

The question is, what rules govern how we feel about breaking social rules regarding music on the train?

## Easy but incorrect rule
The first thing we notice is that if we like the music then it’s fine to play it out loud. If we don’t than it’s not ok to play it out loud.

This, however, raises more questions than it answers. Who is the “we” in the statement above? Do “we” collectively like and dislike the same type of music?

## The “we”
Putting aside formalism, let us have an understanding that in any country there is a majority and a minority culture. To what extent the Swedish majority culture is transparent and easy to digest for someone from a minority group will be the topic of another blog post.

For now, suffice it to say that there is a Swedish culture that deems some behavior acceptable and other not acceptable. It follows that there is some music that is acceptable and some that is not.

## Rules: The music
How does one decide what type of music is acceptable?

Does the music have to be in Swedish? Not necessarily. If you put on an ABBA song in English, I’m sure you’ll be fine.

Is it just, say, Arabic music that is frowned upon? Probably not. 

Is all Swedish music acceptable? Probably not. There is an argument to be made about how “Swedish” a song is, beyond the actual language of the song. For example, the past 20–30 years have seen a boom in Swedish hip-hop and rap songs. Within those genres, there are some subgenres that are more acceptable than others.

## Is this racist?
No.

Let me answer this by means of an example. Having music that is less appropriate for public consumption is common. Go to any country in the world and I am sure that you will find them enjoying one type of music over another. Everyone does it to everyone else, so to speak.

If you were to walk down the streets of Cairo, Egypt, blasting metal music, then you would most certainly be breaking some social rules of conduct. Yes, Egyptian metal music is booming in the underground scene. No, it is still not acceptable to the public. However, if you were to put on a classic Egyptian song (either early ’00s Egyptian pop or earlier romantic classics) on the metro, it would not surprise me if you get half of the passengers singing along with the song. 

## What is it we actually dislike?
In all the scenarios described above, I believe that the common thread is a deep rooted need for belonging, fear of exclusion and fear of losing your cultural values.

This is true whether we are talking about older Egyptians disliking metal music, or older Swedes disliking Arabic music. It’s one thing to allow everyone to listen to the music of their liking, it is another thing that that music takes over in the public space.

If you belong to a traditionally majority culture in your country and you are faced with a more salient growth of a minority culture, it is, I believe, natural to feel threatened.

## Rule-based solutions suck
What can be done about this?

Not much, really. We cannot regulate what tastes people have in music. That would be a horrible path to go down.

We could have stricter enforcement of social laws concerning music in public places. I strongly disagree with this. This would kill one of the fundamental characteristics of a beautiful and fulfilling life—spontaneity. The variation in our daily lives is what makes us excited to see what tomorrow has to offer. We cannot rule out anomalies and live like cogs on a cogwheel. 

## Social sensitivity
Social sensitivity is more of a function-based rule. If it works, it’s great. If it doesn’t, it’s useless.

The aim of social sensitivity is to read the room and find the appropriate actions given your observation.

## Be different—respectfully
The plethora of musical genres is matched only by the great diversity in musical preferences.
With any other strongly held preferences, it is important to note that they are yours and yours alone. No one can take forcefully them away from you—and you cannot forcefully convince anyone of them.

We cannot regulate preferences, but we can agree on mutual respect and having some sensitivity to others in a social setting.


* The photo above depicts Big Jay McNeely playing a saxophone solo on his back at the Olympic Theater in Los Angeles, 1951. Credit: Bob Willoughby. 