---
layout: post
title: Peekaboo for Adults
subtitle: ...mental models and expectations
cover-img: 
tags: [personal, reflections]
---

## Congrats?
A friend of mine recently got a new job. I congradulated them saying, "Congrats! If this is what you want, that is." It was a sincere congratulation from my side, but it didn't come off as sincere—perhaps because it was conditional on this job being something they actually wanted. 

## Peekaboo
In other news... Why do infants freak out playing peekabo? Many children will find the game entertaining even if played multiple times back-to-back. It's a simple game: "...one player hides their face, pops back into the view of the other, and says Peekaboo!", as explained on Wikipedia. Yet, the action of hiding one's face and reappearing, to an infant, is equivalent to you completely disappearing and reappearing again. They have a mental model of the world in which [object permanence](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Object_permanence) does not play a role at all. This simplification of reality lifts a huge computational burden from the child ("If I can't see it right infront of my face, it's not there!"). 

It is equally difficult for adults to comprehend the desires, struggles and ambitions of other people unless it is "right infront of their face". You could think of it as adults lacking object permanance for other people's thoughts and feelings. You may know people in your surrounding that are more emotionally developed than others in this respect.

## Like a good punchline
Even the short one-liners made sure that there was some anticipation of where the joke is heading, before shocking you with the punchline. It doesn't matter much whether the punchline confirms your initial suspicion ("Oh, THEY WENT there!") or took a U-turn to something completely unexpected ("Oh, they went THERE!").

## Mind the gaps in mental models
Everyone wants a good heart-felt reaction when announcing an accomplishment (read: "audience laughs"). Getting this reaction requires some giving some direction to people's mental models (read: "build-up"), so that they know that it is an accomplishment (read: "punchline")!

This is something you have to figure out. What works for one person may not work for another. What works for one type of accomplishment may not work for another. 

## My mom, the publisher
Here's what I did... My family has high expectations of, and hopes, for me. Instead of arguing with my mom about why I'm waiting on a co-author to finish their part before I can start working on a paper, or why I can't say that the paper is "published" just because it's sent to a journal... I made my mom an expert on the process of publishing academic papers. 

In the height of my frustration, I sat her down and explained to her in excruciating detail the differences between a working paper and a journal article, the peer-review process, desk reject/R&R/conditional accept, the journal editors' role, journal rankings, historical acceptance rates for different journals, preprints, copyright, and finally (through some magic) publication. This knowledge ("build-up") makes her in completely competent for any good news ("punchline") I give her about the progress of a paper. Thus, our forthcoming paper in the Stata Journal, to my mom was preempted with a foretelling of the difficulties of reaching said achievement.

## Our arrested development
Much like children and their lack of object permanance, I needed my friend to express to me how much they wanted that job for me to express how happy I am for them. For close family and friends not in academia, I need to explain to them how difficult it is to do (good) research for them to understand my joy at getting anywhere. 

The comedians job is to give the audience the necessary information to appreciate the punchline. The audience's job is to appreciate the punchline once it comes. Much like your family and friends, hopefully, they're already there _for you_. They bought the tickets. They're on your side. They too want to enjoy the show. You just have to get them over the finish line. This, my friend, takes emotional development from you and your inteded audience. (:: Kanye rant over ::)

The real peekaboo here is me __showing my face__ to declare that I am doing good research, __hiding my face__ for a moment to remind them that academic success is not easy (or a given or always there), only to __reappear__ out of hiding and surprise them with any accomplishment, big or small, confirming that my dream is still alive.